Translator: Ellen Maloney
Reviewer: Camille Martínez
Two years ago,
in a small village in Nigeria,
men with AK-47s stormed
Chibok Government Secondary School.
Men from the extremist group, Boko Haram,
kidnapped 276 young, innocent schoolgirls.
Today, 218 are still missing.
I worked in and out of Nigeria
for three years starting in 2007,
and I remember seeing the kids
going to school along dirt roads.
They had smiles, they were polite,
they were dressed neatly.
They often talked about the books
they were reading.
That was tough on the kids,
but they went to school for a safe place.
They went to school
for dreams of a better future.
But turning those dreams
into reality in Nigeria is difficult,
because 61% of the people
live at poverty level.
Compare that to the US at 15%.
The annual income
is slightly below $6,000;
compare that to the US, of $56,000.
Now you see the problem.
But I wasn't there in Nigeria
trying to resolve an income disparity.
I wasn't there trying
to volunteer for a charity,
or to set up a nonprofit organization.
I was there to promote trade
where it's very limited.
I strongly believe when communities
are isolated from the global economy,
they could become the breeding grounds
of groups like Boko Haram.
Just the definition
of "Boko Haram" stands for:
"Western education is forbidden."
That isolation in itself is dangerous.
I ask you one question:
Would those girls
still be in school in Chibok
if the conditions were different
that gave rise to Boko Haram?
You know, you have to wonder,
what if Nigerian people had access
to gain full employment?
Or villages like Chibok were more
integrated in the global economy?
Or families could break that poverty cycle
through jobs and education?
Trade is a powerful weapon.
Trade can fight against
poverty and injustice.
Trade is the gun
to combat human trafficking.
Trade provides medicine to the sick.
Trade provides a roof
for people in need of shelter.
Trade is the answer to give dignity back
to millions of unprivileged people.
Trade is a humanitarian's
strongest weapon.
I work for a company
that facilitates trade in 220 countries,
and I've personally assisted
trade in 46 of them.
I've seen trade in action.
I see trade work.
But you don't have to take my word for it:
economists have been
studying it for years.
In his book "The World Is Flat,"
Tom Friedman said when countries
trade with each other,
they're the same supply chain,
and they don't inflict
military damage on each other.
But Secretary of State, Cordell Hull,
who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945,
said it best:
"When goods do not cross borders,
armies do."
So what is this magical weapon
I call "trade"?
It's simple:
I have something you want,
you have something I need.
We make an exchange.
But the question is:
How can something so simple
have such a dramatic impact
on poverty and security?
Let's start with poverty.
There's no better example than China.
Before China adopted
economic reform 37 years ago,
it maintained policies
to keep the country poor.
Then in 1979, it implemented
economic reform.
It allowed international trade
and foreign investment.
And we all know what happened --
China's the fastest-growing economy.
But here's something:
In that nation, in 1990,
the annual income was only $980.
Fast-forward to 2015,
it's a little over $14,000.
The poverty levels decreased
[from] 84% from 1980
to 10% in 2013.
The unemployment rate is at 4.1%,
slightly below 4.9% of that in the US.
Let's talk security.
I started traveling in Colombia
in 2010, and people were saying,
"Are you scared? Are you nervous?"
And that's because,
10 to 15 years earlier,
the drug lords and the drug cartel
would kidnap and torture people.
But then the government
pumped in economic resources,
and they stabilized
their political platform.
That made a huge difference.
I feel very safe going to Colombia,
seeing customers.
In fact, I just got back
from Bogotá last week.
Colombia thanks trade
for improved security,
reduction of poverty,
and a very attractive image to the world.
And I have a beautiful example of that.
Colombia exported $1.3 billion
of roses and flowers in 2013,
with 75% coming to the US.
So you see, trade
clearly is a powerful weapon
to fight poverty and crime.
But it doesn't stop there.
If I was to say "Haiti,"
what would pop into your mind?
Earthquake, hunger, poverty.
Would anyone think of fashion?
In 2010, the earthquake
killed 230,000 Haitians,
and displaced 1.5 million.
Julie Colombino from Orlando, Florida
went there to help.
She saw humanitarian aid pour in,
but she knew it wasn't sustainable.
She started a nonprofit company
called "REBUILD globally,"
and this nonprofit taught Haitians
how to make sandals out of old tires,
which are very abundant there.
From that nonprofit company,
spun Deux Mains, a profit company,
and that caught the eye of Kenneth Cole.
Haiti has something
the fashion world needs.
They have great designs,
they have top-quality craftsmanship,
they have eco-friendly products.
Kenneth Cole has the global brand
and the distribution model
to give Deux Mains shoes to the world.
Trade, pure and simple.
Deux Mains has made more than 2,400 pairs
of sandals for Kenneth Cole,
and now is in negotiation with Ron Jon,
another global brand.
These sandals I have on today?
Yes, they've got the old tires
on the bottom of them.
But my purchase was made
to help Haiti out of poverty.
My $70 I paid wasn't a charitable
contribution, it wasn't a handout.
It was basic economics.
It was trade at work.
Julie Colombino shared with me
that for every 250 pairs
of shoes produced,
one more Haitian is employed.
So that got me thinking.
In the United States, each of us buys
seven and a half pairs of shoes a year.
That's 2.4 billion pairs of shoes.
Now just think:
If one-tenth of 1%
was produced in Deux Mains,
that would be 2.4 million pairs of shoes.
But more importantly,
it would pump $120 million
into the Haitian economy,
and give almost 10,000 people a job.
That type of employment in Haiti
would have a ripple effect.
And as workshop supervisor
Jolina Auguste told me,
the more sandals they sell,
the less thieves on the street.
So you see, when people
have a job, security, money,
they don't take other people's stuff.
They don't resort to crime to survive.
They don't get caught up
with the drug lords like in Colombia,
or terrorism that teaches them
how to use AK-47s.
The Global Terrorist Index
report in 2015 said
economic conditions play
a very important part in one's decision
to pursue violent extremism.
The report also says
Boko Haram is the most deadly
terrorist organization in the world.
And it recruits from the most economically
marginalized regions in Nigeria.
But on the other hand,
if there is industrial growth,
there's less domestic
and international terrorism.
According to a 2015 study
that was published
in the Oxford Economic Papers,
when industrial growth increases by 1%,
domestic terrorism decreases by 1%.
So what does that mean?
When communities gain access
to the global economy through trade,
they reap so many benefits.
I stand here and ask you
one last question:
If Chibok were more
connected through trade,
and those young men
who joined Boko Haram had an option
to get a job in the formal economy,
would those girls still be in school?
I think so.
Trade would have given them
a weapon to fight terrorism.
Trade would have given them hope.
Thank you.
(Applause)